.TH DECKHAND 1 "July 2026" "deckhand 0.9.13" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
deckhand \- deterministic multi-language build-surface maintenance and hygiene agent
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B deckhand
[\fB\-c\fR \fIPATH\fR | \fB\-\-config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-no\-color\fR]
.IR COMMAND " [" ARGS "]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B deckhand
keeps build artifacts, caches, and generated outputs clean across Cargo, Node.js/Bun,
Python, Go, Swift, Gradle, .NET, and Maven projects. It discovers build systems, reports disk
usage, runs native clean commands, prunes stale artifacts, and can auto-clean
projects when configured thresholds are met.
.PP
It is the operational-hygiene counterpart to version-management tools like
.BR kaptaind (1).
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BR init " [\fB\-f\fR|\fB\-\-force\fR]"
Generate a new
.I deckhand.toml
and
.I .deckhandignore
for the current project.
.TP
.BR status " [\fB\-j\fR|\fB\-\-json\fR] [\fB\-l\fR|\fB\-\-limit\fR " \fIN\fR]
Report disk usage of build artifacts and caches.
.TP
.BR inspect " [\fB\-\-scope\fR " \fIhome\fR|\fIroot\fR] [\fB\-\-path\fR " \fIDIR\fR] [\fB\-\-min\-size\fR " \fISIZE\fR] [\fB\-j\fR|\fB\-\-json\fR]
Scan a filesystem subtree for Rust projects (directories containing a
.IR Cargo.toml )
and report which are candidates for cleaning. A project is a candidate when it has
a non-empty
.I target/
build directory; the reported extent is its reclaimable size with a
.IR debug / release
breakdown. The scan is read-only. The default scope is
.I home
($HOME); use
.B \-\-scope\ root
to scan the whole filesystem from
.I /
(confined to the root filesystem and skipping pseudo-filesystems), or
.B \-\-path
to choose an explicit directory (a leading
.I ~
is expanded).
.TP
.BR clean " [\fB\-p\fR|\fB\-\-profile\fR " \fIPROFILE\fR] [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR] [\fB\-o\fR|\fB\-\-older\-than\fR " \fIDAYS\fR] [\fB\-t\fR|\fB\-\-target\-dir\fR " \fIPATH\fR]
Run native clean commands across all detected build systems in the workspace.
.I PROFILE
may be
.IR debug ", " release ", or " all " (default)."
.TP
.BR sweep " [\fB\-p\fR|\fB\-\-path\fR " \fIPATH\fR] [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR] [\fB\-k\fR|\fB\-\-keep\-days\fR " \fIDAYS\fR]
Prune stale build artifacts and caches older than
.I DAYS
(default 30).
.TP
.BR auto\-clean " [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
Match installed binaries in configured bin directories against each project's
.IR target/ " output. Matched projects are queued FIFO and cleaned only when the"
configured clutter-tolerance or free-space threshold is met, and only outside
the configured cooldown period.
.TP
.BR auto\-start " \fICOMMAND\fR"
Install or manage a systemd user service that runs
.B deckhand auto-clean
at user login.
.RS
.TP
.B install " [\fB\-c\fR|\fB\-\-config\fR " \fIPATH\fR] [\fB\-f\fR|\fB\-\-force\fR] [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
Write and enable
.IR ~/.config/systemd/user/deckhand\-auto\-clean.service .
.TP
.B uninstall " [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
Disable and remove the service file.
.TP
.B status
Show whether the service is installed and enabled.
.RE
.TP
.BR daemon " \fICOMMAND\fR"
Run or manage the monitoring daemon. The daemon watches free disk space and
artifact-directory mtimes (cheap checks every \fBwatch_interval\fR) and only
walks directories for sizes on cadence (\fBscan_interval\fR), after a debounced
quiet window following build activity, or on demand
(\fBdaemon scan\fR). When reclaimable space crosses \fBnotify_threshold\fR (or
free space drops below the floor), it posts a desktop notification suggesting
a cleanup. Deletion requires user confirmation: click
.B Review
and then
.B Clean\ now
on the notification, or run
.BR "deckhand daemon confirm" .
.RS
.TP
.B run
Run the daemon in the foreground (what the systemd unit executes). Requires
\fB[daemon].enabled = true\fR. Only one instance may run at a time (enforced
with a lock file). Signals: \fBSIGUSR1\fR rescans, \fBSIGHUP\fR reloads the
configuration, \fBSIGTERM\fR/\fBSIGINT\fR stop.
.TP
.B install " [\fB\-c\fR|\fB\-\-config\fR " \fIPATH\fR] [\fB\-f\fR|\fB\-\-force\fR] [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
Write and enable
.IR ~/.config/systemd/user/deckhand\-daemon.service .
.TP
.B uninstall " [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
Stop, disable, and remove the service file.
.TP
.B status
Show whether the daemon is running, the last scan time, and any pending
suggestion.
.TP
.B scan
Ask the running daemon to deep-scan immediately.
.TP
.BR confirm " [\fIID\fR] [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
Clean the pending suggestion (the CLI equivalent of clicking
.BR "Clean now" ).
.TP
.BR decline " [\fB\-\-snooze\fR]
Dismiss the pending suggestion, or snooze it for
\fB[daemon].snooze_duration\fR.
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIPATH\fR
Path to
.IR deckhand.toml .
This option is global and applies to all subcommands.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-color
Suppress colored output.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help information.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is read from
.I deckhand.toml
in the workspace root unless overridden with
.BR \-\-config .
The file is organized into sections:
.SS [workspace]
.TP
.BR path
Workspace root path (default: \fB.\fR).
.TP
.BR members
Member discovery mode: \fBauto\fR, \fBall\fR, or a list of crate names.
.SS [clean]
.TP
.BR profiles
List of Cargo profiles to clean (default: \fB[\(dqdebug\(dq, \(dqrelease\(dq]\fR).
.TP
.BR keep_incremental
Whether to keep incremental compilation artifacts.
.TP
.BR keep_days
Only remove artifacts older than this many days (0 means no age filter).
.TP
.BR languages
Enabled language drivers (default all: cargo, node, python, go, swift, gradle).
.TP
.BR allow_native_commands
Allow running native clean commands such as \fBcargo clean\fR.
.TP
.BR remove_node_modules
Allow removal of \fBnode_modules\fR directories.
.TP
.BR remove_venvs
Allow removal of Python virtual environments.
.SS [sweep]
Controls what \fBdeckhand sweep\fR removes.
.TP
.BR registry_cache " (bool)"
Clean old Cargo registry cache entries.
.TP
.BR git_checkouts " (bool)"
Clean old Cargo git checkouts.
.TP
.BR keep_registry_days " (u64)"
Keep registry entries newer than this many days.
.TP
.BR node_modules " (bool)"
Remove \fBnode_modules\fR during sweep.
.TP
.BR python_bytecode " (bool)"
Remove Python bytecode caches.
.TP
.BR go_build_cache " (bool)"
Remove Go build cache.
.TP
.BR swift_derived_data " (bool)"
Remove Swift derived data.
.SS [status]
.TP
.BR warn_free_percent
Warn when free disk space falls below this percentage.
.SS [auto_clean]
Configuration for \fBdeckhand auto-clean\fR.
.TP
.BR enabled " (bool)"
Enable the match-and-patch auto-clean strategy.
.TP
.BR scan_paths
List of directories to scan for installed binaries (default:
\fB[/bin, /usr/bin, /usr/local/bin, ~/.local/bin]\fR).
.TP
.BR clutter_tolerance
Human-readable size (e.g. \fB\(dq5GB\(dq\fR). Auto-clean activates when the total
size of queued project artifacts exceeds this value.
.TP
.BR min_free_space
Human-readable size. Auto-clean activates when free space drops below this
value.
.TP
.BR cooldown
Human-readable duration (e.g. \fB\(dq1h30m\(dq\fR). Global cooldown between
automated cleans of the same project.
.TP
.BR [auto_clean.projects."name"]
Per-project overrides. Currently supports \fBcooldown\fR, which takes precedence
over the global cooldown.
.SS [daemon]
Configuration for \fBdeckhand daemon\fR. Durations accept human-readable forms
like \fB\(dq6h\(dq\fR and sizes forms like \fB\(dq2GB\(dq\fR; unset keys use
the documented defaults.
.TP
.BR enabled " (bool)"
Master switch for \fBdaemon run\fR (default: \fBfalse\fR).
.TP
.BR scan_interval
Deep-scan cadence (default: \fB6h\fR).
.TP
.BR watch_interval
Cheap-check cadence: statvfs free space and artifact mtimes (default: \fB60s\fR).
.TP
.BR debounce
Quiet window after the last observed artifact change before a deep scan is
triggered (default: \fB5m\fR).
.TP
.BR notify_threshold
Suggest a cleanup when total reclaimable bytes reach this value (default:
\fB2GB\fR).
.TP
.BR min_free_percent
Suggest when filesystem free space drops below this percent (default: the
\fB[status].warn_free_percent\fR value).
.TP
.BR fast_path " (bool)"
Also offer \fBClean now\fR on the first notification, skipping the review step
(default: \fBfalse\fR).
.TP
.BR auto_clean " (bool)"
Unattended mode: clean immediately when thresholds are crossed and post a
result notification (default: \fBfalse\fR — nothing is deleted without
confirmation).
.TP
.BR notify_backend
\fBauto\fR, \fBdbus\fR, \fBnotify\-send\fR, or \fBlog\fR (default: \fBauto\fR).
The \fBdbus\fR backend requires building with \fB--features dbus\fR.
.TP
.BR snooze_duration
Length of the \fBSnooze\fR action (default: \fB1d\fR).
.TP
.BR watch_paths
Extra workspace roots to monitor besides \fB[workspace].path\fR (a leading
\fB~\fR is expanded).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I deckhand.toml
Project configuration file.
.TP
.I .deckhandignore
Patterns ignored during discovery.
.TP
.I .deckhand/auto-clean.toml
Persisted FIFO queue and last-cleaned timestamps for \fBauto-clean\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/deckhand-auto-clean.service
Systemd user service installed by \fBauto-start install\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/deckhand-daemon.service
Systemd user service installed by \fBdaemon install\fR.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/deckhand/daemon.toml
Persisted daemon state: deep-scan cache, pending suggestion, and
snooze/dismiss markers.
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/deckhand/
Daemon lock and pid files (falls back to the state directory).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOME
Used to resolve \fB~\fR in config paths and to locate the systemd user unit
directory when \fBXDG_CONFIG_HOME\fR is unset.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base directory for the systemd user unit file (default:
\fB$HOME/.config\fR).
.TP
.B CARGO_HOME
Location of Cargo caches; used by \fBstatus\fR and \fBsweep\fR.
.TP
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
Base directory for daemon state (default: \fB$HOME/.local/state\fR).
.TP
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
Base directory for the daemon lock/pid files and the session-bus probe used by
the \fBauto\fR notify backend.
.TP
.B DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS
When set (or \fB$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/bus\fR exists), the \fBauto\fR notify backend
prefers the compiled-in D-Bus notifier (build with \fB--features dbus\fR).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Initialize deckhand for the current project:
.B deckhand init
.TP
Show disk usage:
.B deckhand status
.TP
Clean everything:
.B deckhand clean
.TP
Dry-run a clean:
.B deckhand clean --dry-run
.TP
Enable auto-clean and install the login service:
.RS
.nf
deckhand auto-start install
deckhand auto-start status
.fi
.RE
.TP
Run the monitoring daemon and confirm a suggestion from the CLI:
.RS
.nf
deckhand daemon run
deckhand daemon status
deckhand daemon confirm
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR kaptaind (1),
.BR cargo (1),
.BR npm (1),
.BR pnpm (1),
.BR yarn (1),
.BR go (1),
.BR swift (1),
.BR gradle (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Elci Group <deckhand@example.com>
